So now that we've finished
describing the structure
and functionality and
implementation of the image
stream gang case study, let's
take a step back and talk
about the pros and cons
of Java parallel streams.
We'll start with the pros.
As we've seen after examining
the various implementations
of search with parallel
streams, search
with parallel spliterators,
image stream gang and so on,
we can see that the Java
Streams framework greatly
simplifies parallel programming
by shielding developers
from all those nitty gritty
details of parallel splitting,
parallel applying, in parallel
combining of the results.
And that's a nice thing.
If you go and look at the source
code for the streams framework,
especially the parts that
deal with parallelism,
your mind will most
likely explode.
Now, admittedly, it's not
particularly well commented
or documented, but even
so, even if it were,
it's some complicated code
that you don't need to write,
and that's a reassuring thing.
We've also seen how much the
parallel stream implementations
tend to be a lot faster
and more scalable
than the sequential
implementations,
either the ones that
use streams or loops.
And again, that's not
particularly surprising.
You'd expect that if
the framework itself
is done properly and maps well
onto the underlying cores.
Why does this happen?
Well, performance
speed up is largely
a function of the partitioning
strategy, how we break input up
into N chunks, the amount
of work performed per chunk,
and the number of cores.
And of course, that's our good
friend the N times Q model,
where N is the number of data
elements to process for thread,
and Q quantifies just how
CPU-intensive the processing
actually is.
So when N and Q queue are
large, we get better speed ups.
When N and Q are
smaller, uh, you
may be better off going
with a sequential solution
in some cases.
Another nice aspect
of parallel streams
is that application
developers often need
to know nothing at
all and don't need
to program threading directly.
You never have to
spawn a thread.
You never have to do any
management of threads.
And in many cases, you never
have to do any synchronization
either.
And removing synchronization
and threading
alleviates all kinds of
accidental and inherent
complexities of concurrent
and parallel programming.
Now, from time to
time, you might need
to use some synchronization.
But again, hopefully,
I've given you
a good set of tips
on how to apply
Java collections, especially
concurrent collections,
in order to simplify
access and optimize
access to shared mutable state.
The way to avoid the need
to use shared mutable state,
of course, is to
simply make sure
that all your behaviors
are stateless.
So we saw here the
use of pure functions,
like search for phrase, or
search results, is empty.
Those implementations
don't know,
don't care about
state management
because they're stateless, which
is a really good thing to have.
As I said before,
if you do absolutely
have to have state management,
then leverage the mechanisms
in the Java class
library, which will often
provide locks to guard access
to this shared mutable state.
Another nice benefit
of parallel streams
is just how easy it is to
do a simple transformation,
a straightforward transformation
of a sequential stream
to a parallel stream.
As we saw a number of
times, particularly when
we talked about the search
with parallel streams
implementation, the difference
between that and the search
with sequential
streams implementation
was just a matter of changing
stream to parallel stream.
That's not always the
easiest way to do things.
It's not always quite so easy,
but that's often the case.
We also saw, for
going from the search
with palace streams to search
with parallel spliterators,
we also had to make minor
changes in the code,
although of course, we did
have to spend all that time
writing the parallel
spliterators.
So that required some
minuscule changes
in some places and some not
so minuscule enhancements
in other places.
Hopefully you've also gotten
a sense to these examples,
particularly the one that dealt
with the image stream gang
example, of the synergies
between functional programming
and object-oriented programming.
And if you look at
this diagram, you
can kind of see modern
Java from Java 8
onwards really occurs
at the intersection
between the imperative
paradigm, which
is where object
oriented programming
lives, and the declarative
paradigm, which is really where
functional programming lives.
And Java 8 kind of combines
the best of both worlds.
So it's kind of like
a griffin or a sphinx,
which is part of one thing
and part of something else.
From my experience,
object-oriented design
and programming features,
things like classes,
abstraction, encapsulation,
inheritance, dynamic binding,
all those good things, are
very valuable to help simplify
the understandability,
reusability,
and extensability of the code.
So if you take a
look, for example,
at our search stream
gang or image stream gang
class hierarchies,
those hierarchies really
helped to make it clear
what the pieces are,
what things are reusable,
how to extend pieces,
and it basically helps
to emphasize and enhance
systematic reuse of structure.
So that's what we get from
object-oriented approaches.
We get reuse of structure.
Combining the object-oriented
approaches, in particular
the concept of methods,
with functional programming
features, like
Lambda expressions,
method references,
sequential streams,
parallel streams,
and so on, helped
to close that gap that otherwise
would exist between the domain
intent on one end, what
are you trying to do,
and the computations on
the other side, which
is what you're trying to write.
And so it turns out that,
as you can see here,
we have these hook
methods, which
are an object-oriented
concept, implemented
through virtual method calls
in our search stream framework.
And then we go ahead and
override those things
and fill in the blanks,
and the blanks we fill in
use the Java functional
programming features.
So we kind of get this
wonderful marriage
of the best of both worlds.